CourseProject
=============

Repo for script and code book in Getting and Cleaning Data Coursera Course

In this repo you will find:
- An R script to analyze the UCI HAR data as requested in the Course Project instructions.
- A code book describing the variables involved in the analysis.

The run_analysis.R script assumes the input data has been unzipped and is in a folder located in the working directory and called UCI HAR Dataset. Inside that folder, the data is arranged in multiple subfolders. The zipped data can be found at:
https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip
We did not use the inertial data available in the folders; we focused on the features processed from that data.

This data set appears to have been used in a machine learning application to automatically label the kind of activity a subject is involved in based on 561 computed from the accelerometer and gyro data the cell phones they carry provide. Presumablly, the training set is for training the learning algorithm; the test set is to verify how well it learned.

If you source the script, it will write into a file ("tidyset2.txt) a tidy set of the means of all the input variables that were means or standard deviation computations of linear and angular acceleration data generated by the cell phones as subjects peformed a set of activities. The inputs, which were originally separated into training and testing data, were combined into a single data set to calculate the means in the tidy set.

The variables selected as inputs in the script and the output variables are in the Code Book.

This script relies on R packages dplyr and reshape 2.

We first load all the data we need from the UCI HAR Dataset folder:
From both the subfolders train and test we get a list of subjects (people who are carrying the cell phone while it gathers accelerometer and gyro data), activities coded as numbers (the kinds of activities they were performing while carrying the cell phone), and a long list of data items - features - computed from the actual cell phone data. From the UCI HAR Dataset folder We also get a list of the names of the features and a correspondence list matching activity numbers to activity names.

We then extract from the list of features the ones we are interested in - those which are means or standard deviations of the original cell phone data - and rename them to make them more humanly understandable and to conform to variable naming conventions. We also make sure there are no repeated names after all this processing.

The script "translates" activity numbers into activity names to make that data more readable by humans. We also name the subjects column explicitly.

This is not an explicit part of the problem statement, but I decided to keep track of which data were assigned to training, and which to testing. This might come in handy for future users for whom the distinction may be important. So I created an extra column denoting whether an observation came from the test set or from the training set. It is an additional column in the first tidy data set. I did not keep this column in the second tidy data set, as it is clear that we are only interested in the means by subject and activity in that case.

At this point, the script binds the subject, activity, trainortest, and features data in one dataframe for each of the training and testing sets of data; and then we merge these two dataframes into a single one.

Finally, we calculate the means by subject and activity as required in the last step of the project description. We use the aggregate function to do so; we could also have used summarise_each or melted and dcast - these two approaches are illustrated as comments in the script as well.
